Newsletter: Non-obvious advice about pricing your product (#13222)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/newsletter/product-pricing-advice.md

To show you how, imagine two [feature flag](/newsletter/feature-flag-mistakes) tools.

The first charges by **seats** and **flags created**. 

Their customers think about every flag and user they add, meaning they do less of both. The flags they do create are more important and are used more heavily. This model appeals to larger companies with more requests per flag, and that means enterprise features like auditability and access controls are more important.

The second charges by **requests**. 

This means more developers can access and create flags. There are more flags created, but where they put those flags becomes more important so they aren’t charged too much for requests. This appeals to smaller companies who ship more flags, so cost controls and DevEx features like local evaluation matter more.

These two examples show **how much** you charge often doesn’t matter as much as **how** you charge. There are many ways this can vary like:

- Usage-based pricing vs. seat-based pricing.
- Pay-as-you-go vs. annual contracts vs. licenses.
- Self-serve vs. custom contracts with sales.

> Deciding your pricing model comes down to your [ideal customer](/newsletter/ideal-customer-profile-framework). For us, that is [product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer) at high-growth startups. The ability to self-serve and have pricing align with usage is important for them, so that is what we’ve gone with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultimately, how you price your product should stream from your [ideal customer profile](/newsletter/ideal-customer-profile-framework) (ICP). Our ICP is high-growth startups that are led by [product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer), so the ability self-serve and have pricing align with usage is important for them, so that is what we’ve gone with.
```

> ## 2. Don't be afraid to charge early

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2.Paying customers give different (and more valuable) feedback
```

- We try to grandfather existing customers’ pricing unless it is more expensive or we have a very good reason not to.

## 4. Settle free tier debates before they happen

The eternal questions for SaaS companies: How much free stuff should we give away? It's easy to either debate endlessly about this or fall into one of two extremes:

1. Give away as much as possible. Users love free stuff, increasing your free tier is a good way to get more users.

2. Charge for everything. This makes more money and money is good.

Ideally, there should be nuance to this. The best way to create this (and settle debates) is to have [clear principles for your free tier](/handbook/engineering/feature-pricing). For us, these are:

- Hobbyists or pre-PMF startups should be able to use PostHog for free. This creates ultra-valuable [word-of-mouth growth](/newsletter/marketing-for-devs). GitHub famously does the same.

- Be more generous than competitors, making it a no-brainer to choose PostHog. This often means a larger free tier with more features on that free tier. For example, we're one of the few session replay tools that offers mobile replays for free.

> - Every product should be priced separately. This means separate free tiers for each product. For example, LLM analytics is separate from product analytics, even though they both use "events." Multi-product companies like Atlassian and AWS are our models here.

Reviewer: We might be about to change this, though, FYI.

The best way to prevent this is to make your pricing more predictable. Some ways to do this include:

- Creating a transparent and detailed [pricing page](/pricing). [Stripe](https://stripe.com/pricing) and [Twilio](https://www.twilio.com/pricing) are great examples of this. People want to know roughly how much they'll pay before they start. We take this a step further and list our [sales discounts](/handbook/growth/sales/contract-rules) publicly too.
    
![Pricing page](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/w_1600,c_limit,q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2025_10_15_at_11_54_142x_e558079a03.png)
    
- Give users a clear view on how much they've spent so far and how much they are projected to spend. We do this on our billing page, along with [a billable usage dashboard](/templates/posthog-billable-usage) and a [docs page on ways to estimate your spend](/docs/billing/estimating-usage-costs).

- Add spend limits. If customers don't want to pay over a certain amount, respect that, but make it clear what they'll lose when they hit the cap.

> - Help users tune their spend to what they're actually using. We do this by providing docs pages on cutting costs for most of our products like [product analytics](/docs/product-analytics/cutting-costs), [session replay](/docs/session-replay/cutting-costs), and [feature flags](/docs/feature-flags/cutting-costs). Data infrastructure companies like Snowflake, Supabase, and PlanetScale all offer ways to identify costly queries and resources to optimize their spend.

Reviewer: Can we mention our customer success teams will help here, too.

- As a last resort, be generous with refunds. For example, we have [side project insurance](/side-project-insurance) that protects customers from huge bills if their product goes viral.

> Some may call this "leaving money on the table" but we see it as doing the right thing. I’m sure others have had success with the dodgiest pricing tactics possible, but the trust we’ve built with customers is core to what makes PostHog successful, so we won’t be changing these.

Author: "Be generous with refunds because it helps your brand" is not really a lesson about pricing though.

![Fin pricing](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/w_1600,c_limit,q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2025_10_13_at_16_41_562x_fd6884de36.png)

Changing your pricing enables you to better align the value you create with what you charge for it. For example, our [data pipelines product](/customer-data-infrastructure/destinations) used to be charged based on events ingested, but then [moved to rows exported and triggered events](/blog/data-pipeline-pricing) to better align what users actually used.

The important part of doing this is making sure you communicate the change well. Our tips for doing this include:

- Communicating early. Figma announced pricing changes in December 2024 that took effect March 2025.

- Give people a warning and a discount (grace period) if you are going to raise their prices.

- Understand who is going to pay more or less. 98% of our data pipeline customers paid less, but for the 2% who paid more, we made sure to communicate why we did this and help lower the impact of the change.

- We try to grandfather existing customers’ pricing unless it is more expensive or we have a very good reason not to.

> ## 3. How you price is who you are

Reviewer: I'd be tempted to make this the first point. It feels fundamental.

Author: Moved to started, rewrote, and added more to it

Imagine two [feature flag](/newsletter/feature-flag-mistakes) tools, they charge by:

1. Seats and flags created.
2. Requests. 

Charging by seats and flags created will likely appeal to large enterprises who ship relatively few features. Enterprise features like auditability and access controls will likely be the focus.

Charging by requests means more developers can access and create flags, but might be more sensitive about where they put those flags in their app so they aren’t charged too much for requests.

These show the impact pricing can have on the overall product experience. **How much** you charge often doesn’t matter as much as **how** you charge and there are many ways this can vary like:

- Usage-based pricing vs. seat-based pricing.
- Pay-as-you-go vs. annual contracts.
- Self-serve vs. custom contracts with sales.

How you decide this likely comes down to your [ideal customer](/newsletter/ideal-customer-profile-framework). For us, that is [product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer) at high-growth startups. The ability to self-serve and have usage-based pricing is important for them, so that is what we’ve gone with.

> ## 4. Know the three Cs of pricing

Reviewer: A few thoughts about this section:

- It doesn't really work with the headline because it's not specific enough. You could probably make all three of these points separately, rather than trying to combine them.

- How many of these are really non-obvious? If we had to pick one to go deeper on, which would it be?

- What are the most expensive bits of your stack?
- How do these costs scale?

Our [infrastructure team](/teams/infrastructure) has done a lot of work on helping us understand this with tools like AWS cost allocation tags. 

Having an accurate picture of our costs enables us to price with enough margin to be sustainable as a business and discover areas for savings (which often get [passed along to users](/blog/session-replay-pricing)).

### Competitors

Users will size you up with competitors, so you better know how they are pricing.

“But I don’t have competitors…” you might say. There is almost always an alternative out there. How are your users accomplishing what your product accomplishes now? More importantly, how much does that cost?

Knowing how much competitors charge enables you to create a pricing model and compare your proposed pricing with them. Although you can’t always have the lowest price for all customers, this enables you to have competitive (ideally, cheaper) pricing for your ideal customers.

![Pricing model](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2025_10_15_at_11_48_112x_4a659ff7c3.png)

> ### Company

Reviewer: I was nodding along until this one. "Company" feels a bit shoehorned.
